We're on.
Tell me a little bit about this opening paragraph that you've mentioned.
I read an interview with you that this apparently came to you 15 or so years ago and that the novel developed as a consequence of having conceived that evidence.
Well, yeah, I read that paragraph
1977 or 78.
So 18 years ago.
Yes, I keep notebooks, and I consider this sort of a finished piece.
It wasn't something I would have hampered with.
It was almost like a poem.
And then, in the intervening years, I wrote three more books, so it definitely wasn't time to write that book yet.
But then, as I was
beginning to write my second novel, I sometimes, you know, I go back and look at things that I had in my notebook.
And I had things about these, the characters that I imagined, um, what were those words, and that they were the girls as adults, you know, very different kind of thing.
And, um,
And when I looked at it again, I had a strong sense of wanting really to enter the actual time frame of those words.
That summer, that sense of heat and kind of intense pressure of adolescence almost.
And for me, the whole world of the book was present in those.
in that paragraph the characters the characters were fully formed no no not the characters not the story necessarily but the aura of it sort of the consciousness of it the whole sort of pervasive feel of the world of the book it's kind of like a sonnet almost it was complete into itself yeah but it was as though um it was prescient in a sense in that it was almost a sense that uh
The book was formed, and I had to find my way to it.
When you wrote that first paragraph, was it 1963, or did this more or less come afterwards?
No, it didn't.
Well, it didn't have a particular time frame, but I suppose in general I thought that it was happening sometime in the period of time in which I was around that age.
And the timing of the book itself, I wanted very much to set the book before the world changed in this country.
I hope that's not going to mess up your team.
Not that I won't.
The book takes place the summer after the Cuban Missile Crisis.
At a time when, particularly in the region where the...
In West Virginia, Kennedy really was a kind of prince or kind of warrior hero, as he was to most of the rest of the country, but probably even more so in that region.
He was the first Catholic to ever have won an election in West Virginia.
And my sense of the country in general is that everything changed after
that string of murders that began with his assassination.
And that I wanted this time in the girl's wad to have happened before that kind of national loss of innocence came place.
Well, yeah, I didn't want that to be anything in the book but a kind of shadow.
Well, you do more or less have an epilogue at the end, which kind of brings us close to it, certainly.
That's right.
We're certainly approaching this exceedingly dark hour, aren't we, since November 63?
Yeah.
Did you also, you know, artistically, I mean, did you really see this as something that you really wanted to compress?
Well, my other novel was sort of masqueraded as a generational saga with the great lapses of time.
And I wanted this book to be almost the opposite.
I wanted the actual, the real time of the book to take place just in a few days.
But I wanted to telescope into it the past, really, of all these characters.
I wanted them to be completely separated from their families and sort of to be completely immersed in a primal world.
But I wanted the reader to have a sense of what they each came from.
You said earlier when we started that you saw these girls as women.
I mean, so you actually see them as adults, is that correct?
Well, my very old notes were, I don't think you want this in the interview because it sort of gets way off track, but a character named Amy J., which is not the same character that ended up in the book, but...
It was her, as an adult, sort of taking off in a car and thinking about this, um, how can that happen during that summer?
But my later sense of the book was very much centered on the characters as children.
Aren't they good?
I mean, you certainly must have some sense.
I mean, this is, even if they make this compact at the end, believe me, that will not blow your resolution to the novel in any way, but I mean, there is this compact that they make.
I mean, this is a secret.
It remains a secret only with us and you can.
And you must have some sense about this dramatic experience.
Well, I don't know, you know.
It's interesting to have sort of suppositions about it, but they do say, too, I mean, they do bring up the question of what if one of us really wants to tell?
And they just say, well, then we will.
They kind of leave everybody in and out.
But I guess I had a very strong sense of it as being, you know, very difficult and damaging.
what happens to them, but that they come through it in a way that they haven't been able to sort of get on top of the other things that have happened to them in their lives, which were things that were all sort of controlled or imposed on them by the adult world.
Did you go to such a camp when you were a kid?
I've never been in public again that I ever went to any camp.
I mean, everybody has to ask.
I never, I went to, it's like,
a number of different camps to the point that they're all kind of melted together.
You know, in my mind, um, I think there are different elements of different places that sort of felt, found their way into this world, but... I mean, the camp is certainly a presence here.
You might even argue that it's almost a character in its own, right, in the novel.
I mean, it's a place that's isolated, totally isolated.
It's a pretty...
I'm just wondering, did you conceive of this?
Why did it have to be at this camp?
I guess it's kind of close from the initial image that you had.
Yeah.
I mean, that image would have been Alma's point of view, I suppose, because they were the younger girls that were in the cabins.
But the book then opens with what's really, I mean, the camp's really the first thing that's presented.
It's sort of through Lenny's eyes.
But that sort of slightly downtrodden sense of it is established very early.
And also, I think, the sense that the world that contains the camp, the forest and that bridge and just the natural elements of it completely overhang it and sort of impose a character upon it.
And that the whole thing that the sort of the counselors and the leaders try to maintain is really a kind
the thought that reflects American culture at that time, I suppose, that feels very impermanent next to what the girls begin to experience.
I wonder, you're the mother of young children.
I have a couple of sons.
Has motherhood in any way influenced your creative development?
I mean, you certainly have written this viewpoint of Kit, and I wonder if you could talk to me a little bit about that.
Let me just add parenthetically, I've heard you said that if Catcher in the Rye were to be written today, it would be marketed as a young adult book because it's from the viewpoint of Kit, you know?
Uh-huh.
Obviously, the themes that you developed in this novel, even though it is written from a new point of young students, is decidedly a dull novel.
I'm just wondering about, I mean, is this a risky kind of a thing for a novelist to be writing?
Well, it's a risky thing, but the book couldn't have been done any other way.
I think that
It's almost hard to respond to a question about how has kind of taking part in family life affected your writing.
There's so many levels to it.
I mean, on the one hand, it made writing much more difficult.
Logistically.
Logistically, yeah.
And I think consciously, because I am always preoccupied with
their needs, and I tend to take care of all that before I feel that I have the space to do anything else.
But I think when you become a parent, the kind of quantum leap in terms of feelings of your own vulnerability.
I mean, I think we all, when we're young, we have a sense of invincibility.
And I think the minute you have children,
that kind of disappears because you're no longer by yourself.
And whatever happens to them is felt much more deeply even than what you imagine might happen to yourself.
And I think the intensity of the book came out of those feelings of vulnerability and also the pockets in which I write.
the pockets of time in which I write became more compressed even than before.
So that the book almost needed to be very intense in order to sort of, for me to be able to leave it and come back to it in the way that I needed to.
And it needed to be very, really a world unto itself that I could enter into.
So in a strange way,
This was the only kind of book I could have written at this period of my life.
You mentioned that paragraph, you wrote that as an entity, 77, 78.
And when did you start writing this novel?
Well, Fast Lane was published seven years ago, and I think I had my second child shortly after that book came out.
And I think when that baby was...
Maybe around a year old.
I began to work on this book, and its first incarnations were really very different from what the words were the same, but it was broken up differently, and there was a very long parson section, a very long linee section, and a longer, you know, they were all in long sort of pieces, and
I kind of wrote half the book that way and then realized what was going to happen in the book.
And I began moving towards that scene.
And the book then was sort of apportioned differently.
And I think also Carmody didn't really begin to be in the book.
Because the presidency is about three years ago.
Also, I stopped teaching.
I stopped teaching about three years ago, and I really did, I'd say, at least half of the present book after that, in that period of time.
And you say it did change.
Are you a rewriter?
I mean, are you an obsessive rewriter, I guess?
Well, I am, but I changed it to word, you know, or phrase.
It's not context, so.
No, it's not context so much.
I tend to write very much like a poet in that I kind of write line by line.
And I seldom throw away, you know, great dreams and material.
Save everything.
But I do, you know, continue to go back over it kind of again and again.
And I look at a page of prose almost the way you would look at a poem.
in terms of the emphasis of lines and the stresses.
I can sense that.
Yeah.
I absolutely can feel the poetic energy and the energy of a poet.
Without any questions at all.
Do you have any... I'm wondering how you see your...
Yes.
I mean, I think I write in a kind of organic,
almost, kind of a way that's driven by a kind of subconscious agenda almost.
And so the work has a kind of built-in thematic connection one to the other.
I'm starting to think about these kinds of plans right now, kind of during this period of time.
My sense of that is almost evolving right now.
At what point are you happy?
I mean, did you have a chance to go back and change anything at this point?
Well, if I had a chance, I would probably
take the book back and stay in it.
And stay in it.
I think there's really a, when you've lived with a book for a number of years, there's almost a period of grieving, I think, when you kind of let go of it and face the abyss of starting on something you don't know anything about.
And I think I could have continued writing about this character.
Really?
But for the form of the book,
it's important that it ends where it does.
You mentioned, again, to go back, you do have a sense at least one of these characters as an adult.
Would there be any thought on your part of writing a novel?
No.
They're finished, they're completed, completed work.
No, but I think it's almost as though the
the power of a writer's vision is very different faces from book to book.
They are so recognizably plugged in, you know, in the world of the work that I don't feel, you know, the necessity of writing about these particular characters.
I know these characters will be related in some direct way to whatever I write.
This experience, you have to wonder how it is going to, if it's not these characters, how an experience such as this is going to
Some of the publicity copy describes this as a rite of passage.
Do you see this as a rite of passage novel?
Maybe I misunderstand the phrase, rite of passage.
Well, it has to be a rite of passage, although it's a much more intense rite of passage than most.
Americans would experience.
It's the kind of rite of passage that a kid in Somalia or really grows up in a kind of war zone might experience, but they might experience in a kind of day-to-day way that would completely obliterate them.
I always sort of distrust the term Rite of Passage, because I think it's so much more a sense of evolution.
But there are events in our lives where we really have a sense of before that happened and after that happened.
And I think this is such an event for them.
Rite of Passage is almost something that everybody has to go through.
And therefore heralds your arrival into
It's almost an admiration, I would believe.
And yet, succeeding at it, or passing, surviving, I guess, is certainly a passage.
Maybe I'm picking on it.
I mean, there is a whole genre of literature, the rite of passage, kind of.
novel.
I don't think this falls into that.
Maybe I'm wrong.
Well, it's a convenient way for them to present the book, you know.
I love to see people, but if you were to pay it on them, it's not, you know.
Well, the whole myth that I think is a terrific job.
I really enjoy working with
You know, it is interesting when I mention to you that I'm doing this particular book for the Minneapolis people.
They take me once a month.
The first one I did for them was the new Tim O'Brien novel.
But where this whole thing is a pitched battle between the forces of granite and the forces of evil.
And once you got going into this, did you see this cosmic clash between
I was looking at the idea of whether evil exists at all, you know, does evil exist?
Or is evil just a function of damage?
The fact that when people are damaged, they go on to damage others.
They're acting under compulsions that almost were learned behavior.
And they begin to fall apart.
So this is a question that you were exploring in the existence of evil.
Yeah.
You didn't take this as if this was not a given at the outset then.
No.
And I don't know that innocence exists either.
I mean, what is that all about?
I mean...
Somebody said to me, there's so much sexuality in this book.
I mean, why?
What is this all about?
I see all relationships as very sexual, and the relationship between a mother and a child is very sexual because, in fact, there's no real boundary of identity there.
I'm just checking.
That's fine.
Go ahead.
I mean, Buddy has a very strong sort of sexual sense about his mother.
It's just a given in their relationship.
It's not a perversion of anything.
It's just... And I think that exists between any bonded mother and child.
And the consciousness is... Sexual consciousness between the girls is... Again, it's something that is a very natural part of these relationships.
In a sense, it's almost like...
sexuality between siblings or same-sex siblings.
I don't see that as innocent or evil.
I see it as, you know, that's just what it is.
I know Tim, in his book, Evil actually has a color.
Of course, he's writing about Pinto, which he gave me live.
Of course, that was a name that they gave because of her.
You clearly don't go that far.
No, it's a Parson thing.
It's a Parson.
Yeah, I mean, he can feel...
he really experiences evil as, you know, this being that is almost, he can hear walking, you know.
Well, I don't know, I mean.
No, I think we're still eating, but I have some more tea.
Oh, certainly.
I think they all represent the things of the author, you know, I mean, in a kind of gestalt sense.
in the sense that all the parts of a dream are representing some part of the dreamer's consciousness.
Okay.
Again, I have here that... I was really impressed that you were able to... Was this a challenge for you to really try and do this in such a complex period of time?
That must mean something.
Again, you had to create these characters, develop them, had to give them their baggage, so to speak, and yet still bring them together in this place.
It was a really challenging book, technically, and there were times when I really despaired.
Really?
Because I wanted to write it in this very dense prose, and yet I wanted it to feel dispensable almost, and I wanted there to be a sense of menace about it that really...
sort of moved at the same time I wanted it to be beautiful, you know, towards almost to really, um, thanks, to really pull the reader into a sense of the world as they experienced it.
Um, I noticed the phrase, country kids, town kids, uh, is this something
You have those little things.
You really don't hammer home the point that it's 63, but you do give us little things every now and then, the pink transistor radios, you know, that people had.
Were you a country kid or a town kid, by the way, growing up?
Well, I straddled the line.
I was a country kid, but I was really a town kid.
I mean, I lived on...
out a rural road.
And I rode the school bus, but my friends were all kids from town.
And economically, I was more like a town kid.
It was sort of before suburbs and that there were, it was the town.
And then there were these sort of two-lane roads that went out to various hollows.
And at the end of the two-lane road, there'd be dirt roads sort of going off into
even more isolated, Hamlet.
Is there a sense of foreboding about these roads, these areas?
They just seem to lend themselves to this menace.
I don't think the sense of menace has to do with the place at all.
You certainly use the place effectively, however.
But I saw it almost as an intervention.
between the evil that kind of came into it.
When Buddy talks at the end of the book about the car that's sitting there in the woods that he's still afraid to go near, he has a sense that the world, his world, the world of the woods, eventually will even break that down and sort of absorb it, take it in.
And in this sense, he feels a sense of shelter and protection
about the very world that he lives in.
And in a sense, it's the only character to feel that from the natural world.
I mean, it's magical and mythical to me more than menacing.
Sort of like the sense of, you've been to Gettysburg,
You know, when you walk around and you can feel this sense of, there's such quiet and kind of, and it's almost something seeping up from the ground that has to do with all that happened there.
And I think in landscapes like West Virginia, you know, which reminds me of one of those sleepy hollow ideas, you know, very tall, rugged hills, very old hills, not like the Rockies, which would give you a sense of,
of outplung grandeur, but they're very kind of brambly and camouflaging and secretive, and there's these valleys and these hills.
Precisely what Tim O'Brien said he felt going through We Lie nine months afterwards.
I mean, the time frame is there, nine months.
You talk about Catesburg, but he said the feeling, not even knowing what had happened, I had to find out.
You could absolutely feel this.
Well, it's also the sense that he knew walking there what had happened.
So in a way, he had a kind of information.
But sometimes even when you don't know, you can feel it.
He said that, too.
I mean, this is before he knew really what had happened there.
Yeah.
I think that's basically what you're saying.
You may say anything you'd like as I'm looking at it.
There are so many writers, I mean, Shakespeare included, who had a
You've found it impossible to characterize kids.
You seem to do it.
All of Shakespeare's kids are brilliant, you know, people who talk like adults.
It must be quite a challenge to really transform yourself and to go back into the mind, to the feelings, to the emotions.
And you do this often.
Well, I tend to be attracted to characters who are outsiders in some way, who are sort of looking at things, but who are distanced from them.
And I think children
That's what children are.
They are incredibly astute and they have a kind of newness, a kind of Zen quality to the way they perceive things, yet they live in a situation in which they are pretty powerless.
And the way that they interpret events, the way that they perceive things is less layered over.
So when you get into the mind of the child, you're always, you're looking at things through a kind of clarity of distortion.
It's almost like a kind of shorthand for real meaning.
Just to switch gears here.
I think you've probably spent most of your life living away from the South, right?
At this point, yeah.
But yet, a number of people, they consider you certainly writing in a Southern tradition.
I wonder, do you accept that?
It doesn't seem paramount to me.
You pick up a few Faulknerian kinds of things in here.
Even your own publisher compares this novel with Harper Lee, for instance.
I'm not suggesting that you do that, but maybe give me a sense of where you see your own place and development as a writer.
Pick anywhere you want.
I guess that I want to have a very intense connection to what I write, and I need that to sort of push through all the resistance that I have to writing.
And when I write about children, for instance, I tend to go back to not just my own childhood, but a sense of...
sort of the way children see things that I have to connect to where I grew up.
And so that has sort of helped me keep the lines of access open to that world.
Although I don't think the world that I imagined it was is there anymore.
I think everything has really changed at this point.
I think the other interesting thing about West Virginia is that West Virginia never felt
It's not considered Southern by the South.
It's not considered Northern by the North.
Certainly not considered Northern by the North.
It's almost a region of its own, a kind of no man's land.
I mean, they didn't have the whole genteel aspect of the South.
It never existed there.
It was more hardscrabble than that and more kind of just individuals.
And there wasn't much wealth.
So when I hear about it being part of the South, I almost feel like saying, you know, it's not part of anything.
West Virginia.
Yeah.
Well, Virginia is certainly southern.
Yeah, but it's very different in Virginia.
I mean, the only thing that feels comparable to West Virginia to me is sort of the mountains of Maryland.
They speak there really with a more southern accent than they do in West Virginia.
I drove my wife out to West Virginia a couple years ago, and it is, and nothing's unique in terms of landscape, but it really is an unusual place, precisely as you're describing it.
It is entirely separate from, I'm sure the geography has a lot to do with where you get the sense of isolation, but it's by no means Virginia, is it?
Well, a lot of them are Southern.
I've always loved James Agee's work.
I love everything Agee did in the first edition.
I love it.
That's wonderful.
Including his Yale book, his book of poetry with a coo.
Oh, my goodness.
I've got to take my work.
Yeah, you're going to have to have a doggy bag.
You've got to start slowly.
I can't remember what we were saying.
We're talking about you teaching, I guess.
Oh, yeah, writers.
Sherwood Anderson, you know, I've always loved his work, and anything of Faulkner's, and some of Catherine Ann Porter, and you do a wealthy, but I think I was also influenced by people like
Burroughs and Bruno Schultz and some of the Eastern European writers, Kafka, Poe.
I'm not surprised by Kafka.
I mean, there is definitely Kafka.
It's a kind of a sense of lushness and sort of
let out power in the prose, crossed with the kind of outcast macabre sense of life that Kafka worked with them.
And I also love Chekhov's story.
and Alice Munro's story.
I think she's almost the kind of modern Chekhov.
I think that work is connected.
I mean, it's a very different subject matter, but the novelistic quality of her story is similar.
Do you find the writing of stories any more difficult than the novels?
I don't know about finding it difficult or more difficult.
I loved writing stories, but I almost feel as though it was something I went through in order to
kind of an apprenticeship, so to speak?
Yeah, I mean, it may be that I will, you know, write stories again, but it's almost as though I begin working on something, and what I'm interested in doing is getting as deeply into it as possible.
And I like the process that comes with being involved with one work for a long period of time.
I had an interview with Grace Bailey a while ago, and, uh,
She said, I can't do it.
I mean, I'm a story writer.
She said, I did one.
And it was lousy.
She said, it's not the rich of you.
Maybe it's interesting, isn't it, that writers have this disability or this sense?
I guess the novel is a marathon, isn't it?
It's just a question of what kind of relationship a writer has to working.
And I know Alec Alfiner, the last time I saw her, said to me, oh, I was there with a couple of other women, and she said, oh, you've all moved on to novels, and here I am still writing these stories.
I mean, I completely disagree with this sort of idea that stories are somehow...
You know, a second tier literature.
Yeah, it's completely different.
I mean, the story form is... It's like a sonnet and an ode, I guess.
Yeah, there's no reason to graduate to writing novels.
You know, fix it, but you did say that, in your case, the writing of stories was a form.
I mean, it was by a word, but... I was getting to...
something different than what they're doing.
I mean, they're working in a form with which it gives them everything they need to sort of work with their material.
And for me, the story wouldn't do that.
Do you get the same pleasure from reading good stories as you do from good novels?
Honestly, I read books as stories as though they are novels.
I mean, for me, it's just presented in a different way.
Do you have any expectations of yourself?
I just try to stay out of the water.
Of what, of yourself or of the writing?
Of the writing.
And do you immerse yourself into it?
I mean, can you get two little kids at home?
Can you separate yourself?
Well, if they're out of the house.
I mean, I don't work during vacation.
I don't work for the whole month of December.
You know, I don't work at this.
How old are your kids, by the way?
Well, they're quite old now.
They're six and nine.
I don't work on weekends.
I mean, so I sit in around...
you know, family life, and I could be much more hard-boiled about it, but I would have a lot of difficulty with that.
Do you write on a computer, or do you write the old-fashioned way?
Well, sort of a mixture.
I tend to write in longhand when I start in the morning because I pick up the pages that I've done the day before and I read them and read them and read them and start kind of handwriting.
And then I look at it on the machine and add things as I'm typing it out and then edit it again by hand.
You know, sort of that type of thing.
You print everything out when you have a version?
I print out every day.
You know, Dr. Osset, he's writing on a computer, but he said it doesn't exist until I print it.
Right, I don't feel, no, I don't relate to the screen.
But of course, I know he's an old editor talking, and I'm sure there's this anxiety about it.
disappear into the closet that's happened to my younger daughter.
I would never read my work on the machine.
There have been studies at MIT that suggested that a work that is read from the screen reads differently to the reader than it would on a manuscript page and also on a printed page.
And I know this, having written for newspapers,
I'm sure that as a writer, you feel that you can't really judge the work from what you see on a screen.
You have to see it on a paper.
Do you find that?
Yeah.
You probably do your revisions on a manuscript, right?
Well, I read on it by hand, and I add things, because often as I'm typing, I'll add more right on the screen.
That's right.
They said word processes have added and made books longer.
Because it's easier to do.
You know, when you're writing nonfiction, you can always just drop in a paragraph here or together with something.
I mean, the pagination all takes care of itself.
You don't have to retype the whole manuscript.
You know, it's just done.
That's happening.
Am I missing anything?
That's okay.
Am I missing anything, do you think, in this exchange here?
I really enjoyed the novel, I have to say.
Tell me about these themes, the child abuse theme, the... Yeah, this is a question.
Even though you had a sense of where the characters were going with the story, did you also...
understand at that point the various, the numerous themes that you would be evolving in the plot, folding.
Because you have a number of them.
Yeah, well, I think it's, the process itself stays one step ahead of the writer's promise.
You know, a lot of what's in the book evolved sort of in the language itself.
That's a wonderful discovery.
All right.